+++
title = "Teaching Statement"
+++

# Teaching Philosophy

As a former high school science teacher, I know that teaching science is challenging. My teaching philosophy for educating future teachers (and students at any level) is to involve them in what Grossman et al. (2009) describe as an approximation of practice, reflecting a view of teaching and learning as participating in the practices of the field. Accordingly, I aim to involve students in authentic practices from the field of study. 

For example, in teacher education classes, this plays out through giving students opportunities to both participate in as well as plan and enact activities focused upon engaging in scientific and engineering practices. Thus far, I have focused the project-based instruction science teaching methods course around this goal. In the first class of the semester, for example, students engaged in an activity focused on developing and revising a diagrammatic model, like a logic model, for what they think equitable science teaching is. In this activity, students in the course are involved in a scientific and engineering practice, scientific modeling, in a way that can lower the barrier to entry into the practice for them. In turn, this activity serves as a reference point throughout the semester as my students plan activities for theirs that involve students in modeling and other scientific and engineering practices, such as analyzing and interpreting data, a practice that is the focus (along with modeling) of my research on data science education. 

In graduate-level classes, I focus on engaging students in scholarly practices, particularly critiquing and contributing to ongoing conversations about educational policy and practice. In the nature of science and mathematics course that I taught, students interviewed a scientist or a mathematician as well as a student about their views on the nature of the science. Then students compared and contrasted what they learned from their interviews with representations of the science or math discipline as represented in recent reform documents and curricular standards. 

In sum, my teaching philosophy is centered on involving students in the practices characteristic of the discipline they are studying. In teacher education coursework, this means that students have the opportunity to engage in scientific and engineering practices in my class—and to design and carry out activities that focus on creating similar opportunities for their students. In graduate-level classes, my teaching philosophy is implemented via course activities that ask students to enter scholarly conversations about what it means to teach and learn science (and mathematics). This philosophy is in response to the challenges of teaching and learning and students’ need to be prepared to not only know about the content they are studying, but to know how to apply it. While I focus in my teaching on practices characteristic of the field of study, I also aim to provide opportunities to encounter and to learn about contemporary educational issues and challenges: In this way, being involved in disciplinary practices is at the center of my teaching philosophy, but doing so does not (and should not) prohibit students’ development as thoughtful and critical educators and education graduate students.

# Self-Evaluation

My teaching during my first year at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville, was strong, with areas for improvement. I taught two classes, one in the fall (Project-based Instruction, TPTE 495, SCED 496, and SCED 543) and one in the spring (Nature of Science and Mathematics, SCED 572). I also began to develop a course for the new, distance education educational technology EdS degree program in the spring. While I evaluate my teaching in-part on the basis of student evaluations, I note that organizations have pointed out that such evaluations have issues with respect to their properties as a measure and as regards known biases against women and people of color (American Sociological Association, 2018).

My Project-based Instruction class received positive feedback, with student evaluations of my teaching ranging from four to five for all of the elements, and with a mean of 4.71 across all eight elements. This was my first time teaching this course, and, so, there are aspects of the course that I aim to improve in future offerings, including improving the organization of the class (per a comment from a student) and improving the coherence of the activities across the course. An additional emphasis for this course in future offerings is to consider how equity can be enacted as a part of enacting each of the three project-based lesson plans that students develop. For example, when orchestrating whole-class discussions (an emphasis of the third lesson plan), I will include activities and resources for students around how the wider participation of all students can be supported through particular discourse—or talk—moves.

My Nature of Science and Mathematics course did not receive student feedback due to the insufficient number of responses from students. Overall, though, my impression was that the class went moderately well, and, like Project-based Instruction, could be improved in future offerings. A specific improvement I would like to make is to involve students more deeply in conversations from the philosophy, history, and sociology of science and math around the nature of these disciplines. Because all of my students were full-time teachers, I focused many of the activities around practical, creative output, such as lesson plans for students: from my conversations with students and reflection upon the course, I believe that such output is still important, but that it can also be coupled with close reading and discussion of scholarship, even scholarship which is removed from teaching and learning, as well.