+++
title = "Service Statement"
+++

My service focuses on activities at the department and college level and in my discipline and local community. Collectively, this service serves a role in the organizations at each of these levels. In addition, most of this service is also complimentary with my aims as a scholar and teacher, as I describe in this statement. 

At the department and college level, as a beginning faculty member, thus far, I have been involved in admissions panels for the science education program. I have also been involved in an American Educational Research Association (AERA) Bootcamp workshop for TPTE graduate students interested in submitting a proposal to the AERA conference. Finally, I co-organized, along with Nils Jaekel, Quantitative Methods Research Group. This college-wide group received the in-kind support of Associate Dean Hollie Raynor and carried out a needs assessment on the existing and desired capabilities of faculty. 

In my discipline, my service focused around the review of manuscripts as an editorial review board member. I applied to and was accepted for a three-year term to serve as an editorial review board member for the Journal of Research in Science Teaching, the flagship publication for the National Association of Research in Science Teaching (NARST). Prior to the beginning of the year, I was an editorial review board member for the science education section of Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher Education and the Journal of Research on Technology in Education, and I continued this service in the present year. After reviewing for the section, I agreed to serve as the co-chair for the science education section of Division C for the 2020 AERA conference. I also reviewed for a number of conferences in the past year, including AERA, NARST, and the Association for Science Teacher Education, and carried out a number of ad-hoc journal reviews, including for AERA Open, Contemporary Educational Psychology, and the Journal of the Learning Sciences. Finally, I was engaged in outreach through a number of workshops I carried out that focused on teaching educational researchers to analyze data, including workshops at AERA and Michigan State University.

Finally, I carried out service in my community. I reviewed proposals for a science education-related initiative for Knox County Schools, presented to a local data science group, KnoxData, and carried out a workshop with teachers at an area school. I also worked with area teachers as a part of research projects that also aimed to directly or indirectly to benefit the students with whom I worked, including more than 10 visits to Tate’s School as a part of an ongoing project with a student who was a job-embedded program Master’s degree student, around six visits to Green Magnet STEM Academy as a part of a project with Dr. Lynn Hodge and Dr. Joy Bertling, and a visit to South Doyle Middle School with Mr. Michael Camponovo in the geography department to carry out a lesson focused on the use of geographic information systems (GIS) technology.

In sum, I have carried out service at my institution as well as for the professional associations and the wider professional discipline—and community—I belong to. This work contributes to the aims of the organizations it is affiliated with as well as to my teaching and scholarship.
